IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SMART GRID, VOL. 11, NO. 4, JULY 2020 Safe Off-Policy Deep Reinforcement Learning Algorithm for Volt-VAR Control in Power Distribution Systems Wei Wang
Student Member, IEEE , Nanpeng Yu

Senior Member, IEEE Yuanqi Gao
Student Member, IEEE , and Jie Shi

Authorized licensed use limited to: Hohai University Library. Downloaded on May 11,2026 at 02:43:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

WANG et al. : SAFE OFF-POLICY DEEP RL ALGORITHM FOR VVC IN POWER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS 3009 locally available information such as bus voltages to design control strategies. Fully decentralized disturbance-feedback local voltage controls. The distributed VVC algorithms allow neighboring agents to communicate and share information to cooperatively reach global objectives of VVC. Distributed algorithms such as the alternating direction method of to solve VVC problems. The decentralized algorithms are developed with ized control is only needed within the isolated sub-areas. To remove the dependency on complete and accurate dis- tribution network topology and parameter information, a few researchers have developed reinforcement learning (RL\ based is used to learn the setting of control variables which satisfy operation constraints in power systems. The tabular Q-learning method with the global reward recovered from the consensus- power dispatch problem. Radial basis functions are used to of the voltage regulation devices. In the existing RL-based algorithms, the VVC problems are always modeled as Markov decision process (MDP\ and solved with Q-learning algorithm, which is a commonly used action-value method in RL. The value functions and then select actions based on the estimated action-value functions and the In this paper, we propose a safe off-policy deep rein- forcement learning algorithm to solve the VVC problem with voltage regulating devices. Unlike the existing RL-based VVC algorithms, we formulate the VVC problems as a con- strained MDP (CMDP\ and propose a novel policy gradient method, called constrained soft actor-critic (CSAC\ to solve the CMDP. In contrast to action-value methods, policy gradient directly selects actions. For VVC problems, it is much simpler to approximate the control policy functions than to approxi- mate the action-value functions for action taking. This is one of the major advantages of adopting policy parameterization, which will be shown in the numerical study. Compared to the existing RL-based VVC algorithms, our proposed CSAC algorithm is safe, scalable, and, sample efÞ- cient. The main contributions of this paper and the technical advancements are summarized as follows: Instead of penalizing constraints violation in the reward function of MDP, we propose a CMDP formulation for the VVC problem, which explicitly models the physical operation constraints. By synergistically combining the merits of the method of multipliers and soft actor-critic can better satisfy the operation constraints in power distribution systems. Compared to tabular Q-learning and deep Q-network signiÞcantly improved scalability. By designing the pol- icy neural network with a device-decoupled structure, the number of parameters in our proposed method increases linearly with the number of voltage regulating devices. On the other hand, in Q-learning based approach, the number of parameters increases exponentially with the number of voltage regulating devices. Our proposed CSAC is an off-policy method, which is more sample efÞcient than state-of-the-art DRL algo- rithms for CMDP such as constrained policy optimization can effectively reuse historical operational data for train- ing purpose. Furthermore, by using an ordinal network structure to encode the natural ordering between dis- crete actions of voltage regulating devices, the inductive bias can be introduced to further accelerate the learning In contrast to physical model-based VVC algorithms, our proposed DRL approach is model-free and does not rely on complete and accurate distribution network topology models or parameters. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II provides the formulation of the VVC problem as a CMDP. The proposed safe off-policy DRL algorithm is presented in Section III. Section IV shows the results of our numerical study. Section VI states the conclusions. II. P ROBLEM ORMULATION In this section, we Þrst introduce the preliminaries for CMDP and then formulate the VVC problem as a CMDP. A. Preliminaries of Constrained Markov Decision Process As a formalization of sequential decision making, CMDP is deÞned by a tuple of a state space , an action space reward function , a cost function , a transition probability , and a discount factor In a CMDP, a learner and decision maker, also called an agent, interacts with the environment at each of a sequence of discrete time steps, . At each time , the agent observes the state of the environment and selects an action . One time step later, the agent receives a numerical reward and a numer- ical cost . The state of the environment according to the transition probability function The goal of the agent is to Þnd a control policy that max- imizes the expected discounted return with respect to reward subject to a budget constraint for the expected discounted return with respect to cost function process. F S A ,a R R c function Pr t T step t s t S a t A R s t a t s t R R c s t a t s t R becomes s t Pr s t s t a t function J J c max J s t J c
is a mapping from a state space to a action space for a deterministic policy or a mapping from states to probabilities of selecting different actions for a probabilis- tic policy. The expected discounted return of policy respect to the reward is deÞned as: is a trajectory or sequence of states and actions, J where S A with J E T t t R t where

Authorized licensed use limited to: Hohai University Library. Downloaded on May 11,2026 at 02:43:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SMART GRID, VOL. 11, NO. 4, JULY 2020 is the short name for . Similarly, the expected discounted return of pol- icy with respect to cost function is deÞned as for short. Finally, we deÞne two important value functions, state-value and action-value function , as follows: represents the expected discounted return starting from and taking actions following policy thereafter. represents the expected discounted return starting from state , taking action , and thereafter following policy The value functions satisfy the Bellman equations: B. Formulating VVC Problem as a CMDP In the VVC problem, the distribution system operator or controller is treated as the agent who interacts with the dis- tribution grid. In this paper, the primary controllable devices for the VVC task are selected to be voltage regulators, on- load tap changers, and switchable capacitor banks. The state of the environment is deÞned as Tap are the vectors of nodal real and reactive power injections. Tap is the vector of the current tap/on-off positions of controllable devices. The action taken by a VVC agent at each time step is changing the tap/on-off positions of controllable devices to Tap . The size of the action space is , where is the number of controllable devices and denotes the number of tap/on-off positions of device The VVC agent aims at reducing the distribution network losses and the operating costs of the controllable devices. Thus, the reward function of the VVC agent can be deÞned as the negative of the total operational costs, which includes the cost of real power losses and the device switching cost: Tap Tap The switching cost of a device is calculated as the product of the absolute change in tap positions between consecutive time steps and the per tap position change cost for device denote the electricity price and the total real power loss at time step respectively. The total real power loss is deÞned as the summation of real power losses of all lines and devices in the distribution network. To maintain nodal voltage proÞles within a desirable range, the cost function is chosen as the number of voltage constraint violations across all the nodes: s a s a s T a T s t R t R s t a t s t J c E T t t R c t R c t is R c s t a t s t function V s Q s a V s E T t t R t s s Q s a E T t t R t s s a a V s state s Q s a s a V s t E a t s t Pr R t V s t Q s t a t E a t s t Pr R t Q s t a t s P Q t P and Q N c i A i N c A i i R t R t C e P loss t N c j C T j j t j t C T j j C e and P loss t t R c t N i V t i
V V t i V
is the indicator function. is the voltage of at hour where V t i node i t
V and V
are the upper and lower limits for voltage magnitudes. is the total number of nodes. By evaluating the feedback in the form of rewards and costs deÞned above via past and/or future interactions with the phys- ical environment, the VVC agent tries to learn a control policy that minimizes the total operational cost while satisfying the voltage constraints. III. S RL A In this section, we develop an innovative DRL algorithm named constrained soft actor-critic (CSAC\ to solve the VVC problem, which is formulated as a CMDP. A suitable RL algo- rithm for solving the VVC problem should be sample efÞcient, scalable, and safe to implement in the real world. Sample EfÞciency: Unlike the domain of computer games, we can not repeatedly generate a tremendous amount of oper- ation experiences for VVC in real world distribution feeders with low cost. Thus, it is crucial for us to develop off-policy RL algorithms, where the learned control policy (target policy\ and the policy that generated control behaviors (behavior pol- icy\ are different. Being able to reuse the historical operational experiences, the off-policy RL algorithms are much more sample efÞcient than the on-policy ones. In a VVC problem, the network loss is deter- mined by the tap positions of all controllable devices together. The number of feasible control actions increases exponentially with the number of controllable devices. Thus, in order to solve a large-scale VVC problem, it is important to learn a control policy whose number of parameters increases approx- imately linearly with the number of controllable devices. Constraint Satisfaction: In RL, agents are often given com- plete freedom to learn a control policy by trial and error. However, in a real-world VVC problem, this is unacceptable. Certain exploratory control actions may lead to signiÞcant voltage violations in the distribution network causing equip- ment damage and undermining the reliability of the network. Thus, we want to develop a RL algorithm, which can achieve near constraint satisfaction at all times. In the following subsections, we Þrst introduce the actor- critic method, which is a widely used policy gradient method. Next, we present the state-of-the-art maximum-entropy based off-policy RL algorithm, soft actor-critic (SAC\ We then pro- pose an innovative off-policy RL algorithm called CSAC to solve the VVC problem. This is followed by a presentation of the detailed algorithm design for CSAC. At last, we derive the policy gradient for discrete actions and describe the device- decoupled policy network structure and ordinal encoding for discrete actions. A. Actor-Critic Method The basic policy gradient method is an actor-only method, where the actor refers to the policy function. Actor-only N AFE O FF -P OLICY D EEP LGORITHM Scalability:

Authorized licensed use limited to: Hohai University Library. Downloaded on May 11,2026 at 02:43:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

WANG et al. : SAFE OFF-POLICY DEEP RL ALGORITHM FOR VVC IN POWER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS 3011
Algorithm 1 Actor-Critic Algorithm
Initialize policy and value function parameters repeat Generate samples by taking actions according to the current policy Update value function parameters according to (5\ Update policy parameters based on value function converge until
methods typically learn parameters for the approximated pol- icy function based on episodic gains from Monte-Carlo sample trajectories. This often leads to high variance and slow learn- method is proposed to update policy function parameters based on the approximated value function that is a synonym for the critic. The iterative framework for a typical actor-critic method is shown in Algorithm 1. At each iteration, the actor Þrst generates samples by taking actions according to the cur- rent policy. Then, the critic evaluates the quality of the current policy by adjusting the value function estimates based on the updated by using the information from the critic. B. Soft Actor-Critic The commonly used actor-critic algorithms such as because they require new samples to be generated according to the latest policy at each gradient step. Although off-policy improve sample efÞciency, they are often brittle with respect to their hyperparameters. To address these challenges, the off- developed to provide a robust and sample-efÞcient learning, which achieves the state-of-the-art performance. The SAC is built on the maximum-entropy RL frame- return but also the entropy of the policy. The entropy for a probabilistic policy at state is deÞned as In the maximum-entropy RL framework, we typically work The corresponding entropy-regularized Bellman equations are: s t H s t a a s t ln a s t V h s E T t t R t H s t s s Q h s a E T t t R t T t t H s t s s a a V h s t E a t s t Pr R t H s t V h s t Q h s t a t E a t s t Pr R t Q h s t a t H s t
Algorithm 2 Soft Actor-Critic
Initialize policy and regularized value function parameters repeat Sample from data buffer Update parameters of value functions according to (11\ Update policy parameters according to (13\ converge until
The two regularized value functions have the following Equation (12\ allows us to derive the closed-form solu- arg , where ,as: relationship: V h s t E a t Q h s t a t H s t s max V h s s e Q h s
converges to , the optimal policy achieves optimal value for all states .Byusingthe closed-form solution, the updating schema of Q-function could be realized in an off-policy fashion. The overall framework of SAC is summarized in Algorithm 2. The implementation details such as the clipped C. Constrained Soft Actor-Critic Although SAC has been successfully demonstrated on a range of challenging control tasks, it is designed to solve MDPs and cannot handle CMDPs with physical constraints. If one simply augments the reward with the product of a Þxed penalty factor and constraint violation, then the learned policy will be either too conservative or infeasible. In this subsection, we propose CSAC by extending SAC algorithm to satisfy the operational constraints in CMDPs. The goal of the SAC algorithm is to Þnd an optimal pol- icy, which maximizes the regularized state-value function, is the historical operation data buffer, i.e., the set of experience tuple Moreover, in real-world control problems, it is necessary to enforce operational constraints. For the VVC problem, we need to limit the number of total voltage constraint viola- tions at each time step, i.e., a e Q h s a When Q h Q h s also V h s s max E s D V h s D s t a t s t R t R c t R c t
is deÞned in (7\ R c R c t and
is the upper bound. For a Þnite horizon CMDP, the corresponding limit R c
for the state-value function associated with the operation constraint can be set as V c V c s
V c T
, where is the episode length. Note that other types of operational constraints can be enforced in a similar manner. Within the maximum-entropy RL framework, the optimal policy of CMDP can be obtained by solving: R c T max E s D V h s s tE s D V c s
V c

Authorized licensed use limited to: Hohai University Library. Downloaded on May 11,2026 at 02:43:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SMART GRID, VOL. 11, NO. 4, JULY 2020 The Lagrange function of the constrained optimization problem can be written as: L E s D V h s
V c E s D V c s E s D V l h s
The method of multipliers can be used to solve the constrained optimization problem. At -th iteration, given a multiplier 0, we can maximize , over policy domain thereby obtaining a policy . We then set V c where V l h s E T t t R s t a t s t R c s t a t s t H s t s s k k L k k k k L k E s D V c k s
and repeat the process. is the step size for the is the projection to non-negative real numbers. With a small 0 at convergence, . To have consistent forms of value functions, the update of the Lagrange multiplier can be redesigned as: V c update and H V c h s V c s k k E s D V c k h s
is the state-value function associated with the operation constraint at -th iteration. It has been shown that the iterative approach for updat- ing the parameters of control policy and Lagrange multiplier will guarantee the convergence to a local optimal and feasible is bounded for all policies . Second, every local minima of is a feasible solution. Third, , and is the step size for updating the of the policy neural network. Note that for Þnite episodic cases, can be set to be smaller in practice. If the local optimal solution is not feasible, then the algorithm can be restarted with a larger initial value D. Algorithm Design for CSAC The proposed CSAC is an off-policy RL algorithm, which allows the ofßine training of control policy in an iterative manner. The overall framework of the CSAC is summarized in Algorithm 3. In each iteration, we Þrst perform stochastic gradient descent to update the parameters of neural networks, which approximate the value functions and policy function. Then, we update the Lagrange multiplier of the constrained optimization problem as shown in (18\ Two sets of neural networks are used to approximate the action-value functions and state-value functions .The V c where V c k h s k First, V h s J c k k k k lim k parameters than for Q V
Algorithm 3 CSAC Algorithm
Initialize network parameters and Lagrange multiplier repeat for each sample step end for for each gradient step with sample batch Update action value networks Update state value networks Update policy network do a t s t D D s t a t s t R t R c t B do Q V B V c
end for converge V c B until
Þrst set of value functions, parameterized with are associated with the value functions in the Lagrange func- tion (15\ The second set of value functions, parameterized , are associated with the constraint. The policy function is approximated by a neural network parameterized by The parameters of the action-value neural networks, are updated by minimizing the mean-square-error (MSE\ , where is a randomly selected mini-batch of samples, i.e., a set of transition tuples denotes the size of the min-batch. The training target is calculated as , where for the neural network associated with the Lagrange function and for the neural network associated with the constraint. Similarly, the state- value networks, , are updated by minimizing the MSE, , where the target . The parameters of the policy neural network is updated by minimizing the loss, l and l with c and c Q B B Q Q B s t a t s t R t R c t B Q Q s t a t r t V s t r t is R t R c t R c t V B B V V V s t Q s t a t ln a t s t
is the sampled action from . The derivation for the policy gradient is provided in Section III-E. The neural networks approximating functions use the state vector and the state action pair as inputs, is treated as a vector of ordinal variables. The outputs of these two networks are the corresponding target state and action values. The policy network has a special design, which will be described in Section III-F. In order to stabilize the training process, the delayed update training labels for networks are modiÞed as targ , where targ are the extra copies of networks, whose parameter targ updates are delayed at each gradient step by targ targ , where . To mitigate the positive bias in the policy adopted. The training labels for networks are modiÞed as , where two sets B B ln a t s t ln a t s t Q l s t a t V l s t where a t s t V and Q s s a where a Q Q s t a t r t V s t V V V V s t min i Q i s t a t ln a t s t

Authorized licensed use limited to: Hohai University Library. Downloaded on May 11,2026 at 02:43:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

WANG et al. : SAFE OFF-POLICY DEEP RL ALGORITHM FOR VVC IN POWER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS 3013 networks, ,are maintained and trained separately. The implementation details of the CSAC algorithm is provided in the Appendix. E. Policy Gradient for Discrete Action Discrete control variables are needed to represent the control actions in the VVC problem such as changing the tap/on- off positions of voltage regulators, on-load tap changers, and switchable capacitor banks. The policy gradient of the SAC algorithm designed for a continuous control problem can not be directly applied for our proposed CSAC. SpeciÞcally, in SAC, the sampled actions are reparameterized with , where are the outputs of mean val- ues and variances from the Gaussian policy network. is the standard normal distribution. Therefore, the is dif- ferentiable with respect to . However, it is no longer true for the discrete actions which are sampled with the output dis- tribution of the policy network. For discrete action space, the policy gradient can be derived in a similar fashion to the pol- The regularity condition, 0, is used for the derivation of the second line. Note that the loss function for updating the parameters of the policy neu- ral network is chosen as (19\ whose partial derivative is the negative of (20\ F. Device-Decoupled Policy Network Structure and Ordinal Encoding for Discrete Actions Since only a single tap position can be chosen by each of the remotely controllable devices for VVC problems, we design the policy neural network with a device-decoupled structure. The input of the policy neural network is the state vector the outputs are the probabilities of selecting a tap position for each of the devices. Thus, the dimensionality of the output layer is , where denotes the number of tap positions for device . In this way, the network size only increases linearly with .The -th action of the -th device corresponds to the logit output of the last hidden layer of the neural network. The probability of choosing -th action for -th device can be calculated by combining via a softmax function, exp exp . The Þnal probability of a tap position combination of all the devices is equal to the product of the probability of each individual device taking its own action, , where the vector of chosen actions across all the devices and the chosen action of -th device. Note that the discrete controls actions of each remotely con- trollable device can be represented by an ordinal variable. For example, the control actions of an on-load tap changer with of Q Q Q l Q c Q Q l Q c a µ v N µ and v N a function: V h s a a s Q h s a ln a s E a ln a s Q h s a ln a s E a ln a s Q h s a V h s ln a s a a s ln a s s and N c N c i A i A i i N c j i l ij p ij j the i l ij j A i p ij l ij j l ij p a N c i p i a i a is a i is i
Fig. 1. Device-decoupled structure of the policy neural network. 3 tap positions that correspond to turns ratios of 0.95, 1, and 1.05 can be deemed as a discretization of an ordinal variable for all the discrete actions of a device to encode the natural ordering between the discrete actions. SpeciÞcally, each subset of the logit outputs corresponding to a device is Þrst pre-processed as follows: where the sigmoid function is Þrst applied to the logits, , and is the transformed logit after the ordinal encoding. Then the probability of device taking action be calculated via exp exp The device-decoupled structure of the policy neural network is depicted in Fig. 1, where the long-dashed lines denote the connections associated with ln and the short-dashed lines denote the connections associated with ln . Note that (21\ is equivalent to encoding the -th action of a control device as a vector, [1 elements are set as 1s and the rest of the elements are set as 0s. By intro- ducing an inductive bias which appropriately distinguishes the dissimilarity among the discrete actions, the ordinal encoding further improves the learning efÞciency of our proposed CSAC IV. N TUDY Numerical studies are carried out on distribution test feed- ers to validate the sampling efÞciency, scalability, optimality, and safety of the proposed CSAC algorithm for solving VVC problems. We also performed a comprehensive comparison between the proposed algorithm and four benchmark algo- rithms including three RL algorithms and two optimization- based algorithms. A. Simulation Setup The IEEE 4-bus, 34-bus and 123-bus distribution test feed- feeder, a voltage regulator is located at node 1 and an on- load tap changer connects node 2 and 3. We add a capacitor bank with 200 kVar rating to node 4. In the 34-bus test feeder, l ij m j ln o im m j ln o im i N c o ij sigmoid l ij l ij i j can p ij l ij j l ij x x j j algorithm. UMERICAL S

Authorized licensed use limited to: Hohai University Library. Downloaded on May 11,2026 at 02:43:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SMART GRID, VOL. 11, NO. 4, JULY 2020 TABLE I P
a voltage regulator is at node 800. There are two transform- ers connecting node 814 to node 850 and node 852 to node 832 respectively. Two capacitors are placed at node 844 (100 kVar\ and node 847 (150 kVar\ In the 123-bus test feeder, a voltage regulator is at node 150. There are three on-load tap changers, which connect node 10 to node 15, node 160 to node 67, and node 25 to node 26 respectively. Four capacitors are placed at node 83 (200 kVar\ node 88 (50 kVar\ node 90 (50 kVar\ and node 92 (50 kVar\ All voltage regulators and on-load tap changers have 11 tap positions, which correspond to turns ratios ranging from 0 95 to 1 05. The capacitors can be switched on/off remotely and the number of Ôtap positionsÕ is treated as 2. In the initial state, the turns ratios of voltage regulators and on-load tap changers are 1 and the capacitors are switched off. The electricity price isassumedtobe$40 .The operating cost per tap change is set to be $0 1 for all devices. One year of hourly smart meter energy consump- is scaled and allocated to each node according to the exist- ing spatial load distribution of the IEEE standard test cases. 10 weeks of randomly selected data are used for out-of-sample testing. The rest of the data are used for training purposes. For DRL approaches, the reward and the cost are derived based on the line losses and nodal voltages calculated from the power ßow simulations. For the three IEEE distribution test feed- ers, when the nodal voltages are within appropriate bounds, the line ßow limits are also satisÞed. Thus, only the voltage constraints are explicitly stated in the problem formulation. The upper limit for the number of voltage violations C e MWh C T j
set as 0. The parameter settings for the reinforcement learning algorithms are provided in Table I below. B. Setup of the Benchmark and Our Proposed Algorithms benchmark RL algorithm. DQN algorithm is one of the most widely used off-policy RL algorithms for solving MDP. In order to apply DQN for CMDP, a penalty term for the voltage violation is added to the reward function as , where the penalty coefÞcient is set as $1 per voltage violation per node. Constrained Policy Optimization (CPO\ algorithm, a state-of-the-art RL algorithm for solving CMDP, is chosen as the second benchmark RL algorithm. CPO not only guarantees monotonic policy improvement at each policy iteration step but also ensures constraint satisfaction throughout the training process given that a feasible policy is recovered. Both our proposed CSAC and the DQN algorithm are off- policy RL algorithms. A single sample is collected at each training step for these two algorithms. On-policy RL algo- rithms such as CPO typically require a large number of new samples to be collected in order to accurately estimate the state values. In this study, the sampling size of each train- ing step of CPO is set to be 5000, which is determined by gradually increasing the sampling size until the algo- rithm can achieve a stable and reasonable performance. The length of each episode is set as a week, i.e., 168 hours. The weights of the neural networks are randomly initial- ized and updated with batch training. The batch size is set as 256. To illustrate the effectiveness of proposed CSAC method, the SAC algorithm with Þxed penalty coefÞcients is chosen as the third DRL benchmark. Except for removing the update step for , the same parameters are chosen as that of the CSAC algorithm. The parameters of neural networks are Þne-tuned based on the training performance. Two benchmark optimization-based algorithms for VVC problems are also implemented. The Þrst benchmark optimization algorithm is implemented based on the single period (one hour\ mixed-integer conic programming (MICP\ which is the same as the discrete control stage without the problem is solved for one hour at a time with the MICP algorithm. The second benchmark optimization algorithm is implemented by extending the single period MICP to multiple periods with model predictive control (MPC\ framework as the optimization-based benchmarks, the actual future load is assumed to be given. The commercial solver GUROBI is used for both benchmark optimization algorithms. C. Sample EfÞciency Evaluated based on the necessary number of samples to reach a stable solution, the sample efÞciency of the proposed CSAC algorithm and the two benchmark RL algorithms is ana- lyzed for the three distribution test feeders in this subsection. The number of training samples collected versus the average weekly return (AVR\ on the testing weeks, i.e., the negative of the total operational costs associated with real power losses, tap changes, and voltage violations are shown in the top sub- Þgures of Fig. 2Ð4. The number of weekly voltage violations versus the number of training samples are shown in the bottom subÞgures of Fig. 2Ð4. The dark-colored curves are the average performances of 5 random experiments, and the light-colored regions represent the error bounds. As shown in Fig. 2Ð4, to achieve the same level of performance, our proposed CSAC algorithm needs the least amount of training samples. The on-policy CPO algorithm needs a much higher number of training samples than the off- policy algorithms, CSAC and DQN. In the case of the 4-bus V c is R t C V R c t C V

Authorized licensed use limited to: Hohai University Library. Downloaded on May 11,2026 at 02:43:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

WANG et al. : SAFE OFF-POLICY DEEP RL ALGORITHM FOR VVC IN POWER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS 3015
Fig. 2. Average weekly return and voltage violation for 4-bus test feeder.
Fig. 3. Average weekly return and voltage violation for 34-bus test feeder. test feeder, CSAC and DNQ only need about 10,000 training samples to achieve stable performance, while CPO requires about 500,000 training samples to achieve stable performance. The off-policy nature of CSAC algorithm not only signiÞ- cantly improves sample efÞciency, but also allows us to reuse historical operational data. In contrast, the on-policy algo- rithms such as CPO need to generate new samples according to the latest policy at every training step. Moreover, at each step of CPO, a large number of samples need to be collected to form an accurate estimate of the state values. D. Optimality, Constraint Satisfaction, and Scalability The AVRs and the number of weekly average voltage con- straints violations (AVVs\ during the testing weeks of the
Fig. 4. Average weekly return and voltage constraints violation for 123-bus test feeder. TABLE II OMPARISON OF OLT -VAR C ONTROL P ERFORMANCE C V A LGORITHMS
proposed CSAC algorithm, the two benchmark RL algorithms, and the two benchmark optimization algorithms are shown in Table II. The results of the RL algorithms are the averaged performances of 5 experiments, each with a different random As shown in the table, our proposed CSAC algorithm achieves the highest return among all algorithms for the 34-bus and 123-bus test feeders and the second highest return for the 4-bus test feeder. As the size of the distribution feeder increases, the advantage of our proposed CSAC algorithm becomes more pronounced. Furthermore, our proposed CSAC algorithm can satisfy the voltage constraints almost all the time whereas the other benchmark RL algorithms may lead to sig- niÞcant voltage violations. Minor voltage violations do occur in the 4-bus and 34-bus test feeders when our proposed CSAC algorithm is used. However, the average voltage violation magnitude is much smaller than 0.01 per unit. Although the MPC extension of the MICP algorithm achieves a better solution on the 4-bus test feeder, it is not scalable and can not Þnd a solution of a single rolling step with 4 hours of computation time for both the 34- bus and the 123-bus systems. Similarly, the DQN algorithm is also not scalable and can not obtain a solution for the 123-bus system within a reasonable amount of time. This seed.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Hohai University Library. Downloaded on May 11,2026 at 02:43:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SMART GRID, VOL. 11, NO. 4, JULY 2020 TABLE III OMPARISON C B
is because the number of Q values which need to be cal- culated for each greedy action selection, , increases quickly with the number of controllable devices. In our proposed CSAC algorithm, the policy function can be approx- imated with a neural network whose size increases linearly with the number of devices as presented in Section III-F. Therefore, our proposed device-decoupled encoding approach has much better scalability. Note that the same device- decoupled network structure was applied on the CPO algo- rithm, where the trust region constraint is enforced to limit the KL-divergence between the previous policy and the updated policy, .The total KL-divergence can be decomposed with respect to each device as The comparison between SAC with different penalty coefÞcients and CSAC is performed to further demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method. The comparison results are summarized in Table III. When the proposed CSAC is compared to the SAC with a constraint violation penalty fac- 1, it is very clear that our proposed algorithm not only produces a higher weekly return without the penalty of voltage violations (AVRwV\ and a smaller AVV. V. C A model-free DRL algorithm is proposed to solve the VVC problem without depending on accurate and complete dis- tribution network topology and parameter information. The VVC problem is formulated as a CMDP and solved by our proposed CSAC algorithm, which is a safe off-policy DRL algorithm. In the algorithm implementation, the policy network is specially designed with a device-decoupled structure and an ordinal encoding scheme. Numerical studies conducted on the 4-bus, 34-bus, and 123-bus distribution test feed- ers demonstrate that the proposed algorithm achieves better sample-efÞciency, scalability and constraint satisfaction than the state-of-the-art reinforcement learning algorithms and the conventional optimization-based algorithms. MPLEMENTATION N c i A i KL a a s ln a s a s KL N c i KL i i tor C V ONCLUSION A PPENDIX I D
Algorithm 4 CSAC Algorithm - Implementation Details
Initialize policy network parameters , state-value func- targ targ , state-action value , and Lagrange repeat for each sample step Observe state and take action Observe the next state ,reward and cost Store data end for for each gradient step Sample a batch of transitions, , randomly Compute target labels as targ targ by a gradient descent step tions V parameters, l c l c functions Q parameters l l c c multiplier do s t a t s t s t R t R c t D D s t a t s t R t R c t do B Q l s t a t R t R c t V l s t Q c s t a t R c t V c s t V l s t min i Q l i s t a t ln a t s t V c s t max i Q c i s t a t ln a t s t a t s t Update l l c c j i j i j f Q j i i j l c f Q j i
by a gradient descent step B B Q j i Q j Update l c j j j f V j j l c f V j
by a gradient descent step B B V j V j Update f f
Update target function parameters targ targ with delay factor targ targ Update target with step size B B ln a s ln a s Q l s a V l s a s V l and c j j j j j j j l c
B B V c
end for converge V c until
a maximization problem. The max operation is used in (25\ to reduce . Then, the gradient descent update is performed with Adam optimizer to minimize the MSE error with respect to the training targets. The gradient of the loss function (29\ is the negative of (20\ with expectation over the sampled batch. Q c

Authorized licensed use limited to: Hohai University Library. Downloaded on May 11,2026 at 02:43:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

WANG et al. : SAFE OFF-POLICY DEEP RL ALGORITHM FOR VVC IN POWER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS 3017 The delayed update of target networks is performed in (30\ Finally, the Lagrange multiplier is updated following (31\ tion in electric power distribution systems by clustering of smart meter data,Ó in Proc. 15th IEEE Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. Appl. (ICMLA\ pp. 259Ð265. driven phase identiÞcation in smart grid,Ó in Proc. Green Forward pp. 16Ð23. the theory of information losses,Ó IEEE Trans. Smart Grid ,tobe ÒAutonomous voltage control for grid operation using deep reinforce- ment learning,Ó in Proc. PESGM , Atlanta, GA, USA, Aug. 2019, pp. 1Ð5. power system emergency control using deep reinforcement learning,Ó IEEE Trans. Smart Grid , to be published. optimization in distribution systems,Ó IEEE Trans. Smart Grid ,vol.6, no. 3, pp. 1473Ð1483, May 2015. et al. , ÒCoordinated control method of voltage and reactive power for active distribution networks based on soft open point,Ó IEEE Trans. Sustain. Energy , vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 1430Ð1442, Oct. 2017. optimization of capacitor bank switching, renewable energy, and home appliances,Ó IEEE Trans. Smart Grid , vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 4077Ð4086, Sep. 2018. control in distribution systems with limited switching operations,Ó Trans. Power Syst. , vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 889Ð899, May 2009. dinated Voltage/VAR control of high renewable-penetrated distribution systems,Ó IEEE Trans. Power Syst. , vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 4398Ð4408, Nov. 2017. optimization and voltage control method for active distribution networks via dual time-scale coordination,Ó V R EFERENCES published. IEEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Hohai University Library. Downloaded on May 11,2026 at 02:43:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SMART GRID, VOL. 11, NO. 4, JULY 2020 Smart Meter Energy Consumption Data in London Households https://data.london.gov.uk/dataset/smartmeter-energy-use-data-in- strained Volt/VAR control scheme for active distribution networks with nodal power uncertainties,Ó IEEE Trans. Power Syst. , vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 314Ð325, Jan. 2019. london-households
Wei Wang (Student Member, IEEE\ received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from the Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China, in 2012, and the M.S.E. degree in electrical and computer engineering from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA, in 2014. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in elec- trical and computer engineering with the University of California, Riverside, USA. His research interests include optimization and machine learning applica- tions in power systems.
Nanpeng Yu (Senior Member, IEEE\ received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 2006, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Iowa State University, Ames, IA, USA, in 2007 and 2010, respectively. He is currently an Associate Professor with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Riverside, CA, USA. His current research interests include machine learning theory, big data analytics in smart grid, electricity market design, and smart energy communities. He is an Editor of the IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON MART the IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON USTAINABLE ,andthe Transactions on Electrical Energy Systems S G RID S E NERGY International
Yuanqi Gao (Student Member, IEEE\ received the B.E. degree in electrical engineering from Donghua University, Shanghai, China, in 2015. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in electrical and com- puter engineering with the University of California, Riverside, CA, USA. His research interest includes big data analytics in smart grids.
Jie Shi (Student Member, IEEE\ received the B.S. degree in automation from the Shenyang University of Technology, Shenyang, China, in 2012, and the M.S. degree in control theory and engineering from Southeast University, Nanjing, China, in 2015. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in electri- cal and computer engineering with the University of California, Riverside, CA, USA. His research interests include smart city, machine learning, and time series analysis.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Hohai University Library. Downloaded on May 11,2026 at 02:43:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 